README.md, before:

# Rexta CPU Simulation

Rexta is a simple **8-bit CPU** designed mainly for experimentation and learning about CPU architectures. 

It features:

- 8 general-purpose 8-bit registers (R0–R7)
- 16-bit program counter (PC)
- 16-bit stack pointer (SP)
- 64 KB of RAM
- Basic ALU operations, load/store, jumps, and subroutine calls
- Carry and zero flags

The simulator in this repo is intended to model CPU behavior before potentially implementing it on hardware (FPGA or similar).

---

## Features

- ALU instructions: `ADD`, `SUB`, `AND`, `OR`, `XOR`, `NOT`
- Immediate operations: `LOADI`, `ADDI`
- Memory operations: `LOAD`, `STORE`
- Program flow: `JMP`, `JZ`, `JC`, `JSR`, `RTS`
- Halt: `HLT`

---

## Instruction Format

The first 4 bits of the opcode determine the operand layout:

| Opcode | Instruction     | Format                  | Notes                       |
|--------|----------------|------------------------|-----------------------------|
| 0x20   | ADD Rd, Rs     | Rd in lower 4 bits, Rs in upper 4 bits | Rd = Rd + Rs |
| 0x21   | SUB Rd, Rs     | Rd/Rs as above          | Rd = Rd - Rs               |
| 0x22   | AND Rd, Rs     | Rd/Rs as above          | Bitwise AND                |
| 0x23   | OR Rd, Rs      | Rd/Rs as above          | Bitwise OR                 |
| 0x24   | XOR Rd, Rs     | Rd/Rs as above          | Bitwise XOR                |
| 0x10   | NOT Rd         | Rd in lower 4 bits      | Bitwise NOT                |
| 0x30   | LOADI Rd, imm  | Rd in lower 4 bits, imm in next byte | Load immediate value |
| 0x31   | ADDI Rd, imm   | Rd in lower 4 bits, imm in next byte | Rd += imm |
| 0x40   | LOAD Rd, addr  | Rd in lower 4 bits, addr in next 2 bytes | Load from memory |
| 0x41   | STORE Rd, addr | Rd in lower 4 bits, addr in next 2 bytes | Store to memory |
| 0x50   | JMP addr       | Addr in next 2 bytes    | Jump unconditionally       |
| 0x51   | JZ addr        | Addr in next 2 bytes    | Jump if zero flag set      |
| 0x52   | JC addr        | Addr in next 2 bytes    | Jump if carry flag set     |
| 0x53   | JSR addr       | Addr in next 2 bytes    | Call subroutine            |
| 0x01   | RTS            | None                    | Return from subroutine     |
| 0x02   | HLT            | None                    | Halt execution             |

---

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Rust (latest stable version)
- Cargo package manager

... or an editor that supports dev containers.

---

### Build and Run

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jonathan-gaul/rexta.git
cd rexta
```

Assemble the demo file:

```bash
cargo run --bin rexta-asm demo-files/test.rxa
```

Simulate the demo file:
```bash
cargo run --bin rexta-sim demo-files/test.b 0x2000
```

You should see output from the simulation, for example:

```
Run successful
Value at 0x2000: 0x09
```

Commit message:

Update README with upgrade info

README.md, after:

# Rexta CPU Simulation & Assembler

The Rexta CPU is a simple **8-bit CPU** with 24-bit addressing designed mainly for experimentation and learning about CPU architectures. 

It features:

- 9 general-purpose 8-bit registers (`R0`–`R8`)
- 24-bit program counter (PC)
- 24-bit stack pointer (SP)
- Up to 16 MiB of addressable memory
- Basic ALU operations, load/store, jumps, and subroutine calls
- Carry and zero flags

The simulator in this repo is intended to model CPU behavior before potentially implementing it on hardware (FPGA or similar).

The assembler in this repo creates flat binary files which can be directly executed by the simulator or could eventually be loaded and run on the hardware itself.

---

## Features

- ALU instructions: `ADD`, `SUB`, `AND`, `OR`, `XOR`, `NOT`
- Immediate operations: `LOADI`, `ADDI`
- Memory operations: `LOAD`, `STORE`
- Program flow: `JMP`, `JZ`, `JC`, `JSR`, `RTS`
- Halt: `HLT`

---

## Instructions

For detailed information on the CPU itself and the instructions, see the documentation:

[Rexta CPU documentation](https://github.com/jonathan-gaul/rexta-docs/tree/main/CPU)

---

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Rust (latest stable version)
- Cargo package manager

... or an editor that supports dev containers.

---

### Build and Run

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/jonathan-gaul/rexta.git
cd rexta
```

Assemble the demo file:

```bash
cargo run --bin rexta-asm demo-files/test.rxa
```

This should create a `test.b` file in the demo-files directory.

Simulate the demo file:
```bash
cargo run --bin rexta-sim demo-files/test.b 0x2000
```

You should see output from the simulation, for example:

```
Run successful
Value at 0x2000: 0x09
```
